# Exam 2

1. *Suppose that a particular Apple iPhone costs $799. Suppose that a competitor's smartphone costs $499. The competitor's smartphone has about 90% of the same features as the iPhone, and all the basic features on the two phones are of equal quality and functionality and are easy to use. Suppose that the costs of producing the phones for the two companies is exactly the same. Suppose further that Apple sells only slightly fewer units of its phone as the competitor, despite the much higher price. Using only material from this course, explain why this might occur in 120 words or fewer.*
	
	In this situation, Apple is likely the established firm appealing to their most profitable customers at the high-end. This leaves a gap at the lower end of the market for disruptive companies to fill the needs of those customers at lower prices. As these companies grow, they will start to target their products or services upwards towards the middle and maybe eventually the high end of the market. This is disruptive innovation, and it can force the established firm to respond with their own disruptive solution or double down on only pursuing their most valuable customers.

2. *Suppose that a number of years ago XYZ Corp. was in the business of waste disposal for business and industrial clients in southern California. The CEO of XYZ Corp., along with his fellow C-suite executives and his board of directors, were aware that the market for waste disposal in the U.S. was highly fragmented, with many hundreds of companies operating in local markets (e.g., there were three companies in New York, two in Boston, one in Seattle, one in Phoenix, one in Austin, etc., and all these companies were different). XYZ Corp.'s CEO and board members decided to attempt to try to design processes to give themselves economies of scale that would allow them to move into other markets and displace existing operators, many of which were much smaller companies than XYZ. They directed the company's resources and personnel toward designing the necessary processes and procedures. Suppose that five years later XYZ had transformed the business and industrial waste disposal business in the U.S. and was now a huge national company with more than 50% of the market in industrial waste disposal. Many hundreds of firms that had been in the waste disposal business five years earlier were now bankrupt or had been absorbed into XYZ. Based on the material from this class, describe the most likely reason that XYZ was successful in 120 words or fewer.* 
	
	While this case does not explicitly state that big data strategies were involved in this process, many of the implementation techniques discussed in lecture were successfully applied. XYZ Corp defined an opportunity in the fractured state of the market. They made a determination to focus on innovating economies of scale to gain a competitive advantage in cost reduction and prioritized resources towards those innovations. This was a top-down innovation, meaning it was planned as a matter of corporate strategy so the allocation of company resources was quick and plentiful. This focus and speed on implementing specific solutions likely allowed XYZ to win customers at lower costs before competitors could react. 
	
3. *Jane is an adult who has a serious chronic disease she has had since childhood. She recently joined Facebook and has communicated on that platform concerning her disease. Jane uses Yahoo for her email. Soon after Jane joined Facebook advertisements for medicines and treatments for her disease began appearing when she logged into her Yahoo email account. Describe what has happened from a big data viewpoint. Is it reasonable that Jane is seeing these advertisements?*

	Facebook has built one of the most successful advertising businesses in the world by being able to offer extremely detailed personal data from their users to their business partners. Whether Jane interacted with posts or groups around her disease or posted about it directly, Facebook's data scientist are able to associate this illness with her profile. This data will be used to sell ads to companies who are interested in targeting people who may have a relationship to this disease. 
	
	In the specific case of Facebook, Jane's data is not sold to these advertisers directly. Rather, Facebook's extensive internet real-estate of ads are sold based on the premise that they are more valuable for the information they have on her. Given that most users of Facebook are not aware of this ad network or the granularity of personal information that supports it, I don't believe it to be an ethical business practice. Even if there is disclosure of this information, I would question whether consent really exists in an era of nearly-monopolized social networks. 

4. *Several customer service representatives (CSRs) at one of ARB Corp.'s call centers began to notice that many customers were calling in with a similar complaint about one of ARB's services. The CSRs approached their supervisor about the issue and proposed an innovative change to the service. The supervisor listened to the issue but decided to take no action because she was not convinced it was really a problem worth fixing. The CSRs did not pursue the matter for several more months, but then decided to raise the issue again because it was not diminishing with the customers telephoning the call center. Eventually the supervisor relented and passed the issue to her supervisor. After six months the company took action and implemented the CSRs' suggested change to the procedure for the service in question. Customer complaints at the call center immediately dropped significantly. After completing the change, company managers discovered that their competition had been utilizing the new procedure for several years and that ARB had in fact at this point just caught up with the competition. Describe specifically both the overall issue that ARB Corp. faced in this scenario and each of the individual problems that occurred within the company. What might ARB do to mitigate such problems in the future? Answer in 150 words or fewer.*

In this scenario, ARB Corp. is highlight a key disadvantage of bottom-up innovation: they need to be taken seriously, prioritized, and (if necessary) resourced effectively. Bottom-up innovations arise from observations, typically by employees closer to the "shop floor" of operational processes. In this case, the CSRs made an observation about customer complaints regarding a specific service. They even went on to propose the innovative solution that would address the issue. In this case, the supervisor made a judgement that the innovation wasn't worth escalatin. The company missed the opportunity to implement the useful solution and fell further behind their competitors in this area.

There are two approaches ARB should take to mitigate these types of issues in the future. The first is to ensure that managerial culture supports bottom-up innovations and useful observations don't go unheard. However, managers have a difficult task of filtering and prioritizing issues so this solution has some gaps. They would be helped by the second approach of implementing better customer support analytics so issues like this don't have to be "observed" slowly by humans in order to be noticed. 

5. *CCB Corp. sells sophisticated financial products to institutional investors (that is, not directly to consumers). Such products, including derivatives and unusually structured debt products, are designed to provide investors with a small and often short-term profit margin relative to the overall financial markets. To meet its customers' needs CCB must utilize big data constantly. About 40% of the products CCB designs for its customers end up failing, that is, lead to losses for the customers rather than gains. However, CCB is a highly successful company and rarely loses customers. From a big data standpoint (not an investment standpoint), explain the most likely reason that CCB's performance is acceptable to clients. Answer in 120 words or fewer.*

	The key requirement of successful big data strategy implemention is increased ROI. In this case, we don't have the important metric of the failure rate of these financial products without big data. Given that these are short-term investments, a 60% success rate is still extremely valuable and likely wouldn't be possible without effective big data tools and techniques. Even if the additional returns are small, they can be significant over the long run.

6. *What is a "hub firm"? What characteristics do hub firms have that provide them with competitive advantage? What are the threats posed by hub firms? Answer specifically and completely in 150 words or fewer.*
	
	Hub firms are companies that are extremely successful in their own industries, but more importantly can use the the success of that industry to pivot into others by capitalizing on their network effects. Typically, these companies have access to vast amounts of data from their core businesses that give them competitive advantages in other areas. For example, Amazon can use its power as an online merchant to create and sell their own first party goods. 
	
	The danger of these companies is the extreme amount of centralized power they are accumulating by absorbing entire industries. They not only destroy jobs in the companies they overtake, but they are likely to be super-optimized businesses that do not employ many workers in the first place. This is accelerating the already increasing wealth gap and placing a lot of economic and even political power in the hands of a few actors who are incentivized to value their shareholders over the damage caused by their actions.
	
7. *There have been many major data breaches over the past 10 years, most of which have compromised data of millions of people. How have consumers in general responded to the data breaches, such as that of Facebook or Equifax or Uber? How have governments responded? Can big data be part of the solution to data breaches? If so, how? Answer in 200 words or fewer.*

	The lack of public outcry over major data breaches (or privacy issues in general) has been a major source of personal anxiety over the past decade. This may be because of disinterest, but increasingly I think it may be due to feelings of disempowerment. Regardless how extensive the damage is, the remanants of regulatory bodies in the US generally issue little more than a slap on the wrist. The consequences from EU bodies are a little more hopeful, but in general there aren't many political incentives for companies to protect their data.  
	
	There is some hope that big data solutions can evaluate security vulnerabilities before bad actors can and help companies focus their resources on the most useful safeguards. This is probably the most effective path forward while there are few political and economic incentives for companies to truly invest in security infrastructure. If those investments can be made efficiently enough to undercut the risk, then we create the missing incentive to guard our data.
	
	8. *There are several roles that are necessary for data scientists to play to ensure that big data initiatives are successful. Two of these are what Davenport terms "Scientist" and "Trusted Adviser." Describe these two roles and indicate why they are important to big data projects in 100 words or fewer.*
The scientist approaches problems through the scientific method: by creating hypotheses, experimenting, analyzing, and reporting their results. This is important for developing higher quality results that accurately address the question at hand. 

The trusted adviser can successfully communicate the results of big data initiatives to decision makers. If there are no decisions resulting from big data, then there's no point to collecting it in the first place. This is a difficult job, because it can require managing egos of people who are accustomed to following their intuition throughout their careers. 