# Exam 1

1. *The Walker book describes data monetization strategies at Google and Amazon.com, among others. Describe how Google or Amazon (but not both) has used its existing businesses and/or internal processes to monetize new services or products. Answer in 120 words or fewer.*

	Amazon, being the world/s largest bookstore, had access to a large amount of data on book sales. While not explicitly mentioned in the text, this included ebook sales. Knowing the popularity of ebooks helped Amazon make the decision to invest in the Kindle as part of its ebook ecosystem. Additionally, they are able to take advantage of advertising on that platform directly with the data they have about the specific owner of the Kindle. In a similar fashion, data on video sales and, likely, data on Amazon market behavior in general would have been useful in deciding to launch their Prime Video service. In both examples, Amazon had information that these products would likely be profitable before their launch.


2. *An article we read for class describes how eBay is using big data to improve its business. What challenges did eBay face regarding its data? How was it able to respond? Name one or more strategies it recommended for succeeding with a big data strategy. Answer in 150 words or fewer.*

	The scale and velocity of eBay's data needs oustripped what a traditional data warehouse could usefully provide. To manage the massive quantity of customer and sales data, eBay sought out a data lake platform and settled on Hadoop. This gave the company more options in terms of data structure and querying ability, including real-time analysis. One of the strategies offered by the author for developing new big data platforms is to ensure you are picking solutions that will be interoperable with other tools in the field. This is because you want the flexibility to perform different types of analyses on your data, and it is unlikely that one tool will perform every function at the highest level. Furthermore, you should consider which companies offer the most useful data partnerships for implement the solution into your business. In eBay's case, part of their decision to partner with HortonWorks was an agreement to work together on Hadoop features. 

3. *Scale and velocity are two major characteristics of big data. What is meant by each term? Why are they important to understanding why big data are different than traditional data sets? How can scale and velocity be used to improve performance and increase economic value in a firm? Provide examples to illustrate the points you make. Answer in 150 words or fewer.*

	The scale of data refers to the large quantities of data available to be consumed and analyzed. Velocity describes how quickly that data can be available. Compared to data used in the past, the scale is much larger and the velocity is much quicker to the point of being real-time. This is important as it effects the types of decisions that can now be made from successful analysis. The larger scale allows organizations to examine much more information than before to make those decision, to the point that "sampling" has almost been replaced with analysis of the entire population. Faster velocity means being able to apply that data at specific moments to capitalize on their value. One example is Nordstrom  keeping a live inventory system which enables them to address out-of-stock issues quickly by assessing stock in local stores for delivery.

4. *When a consumer swipes a credit card at a grocery store, what happens from a big data standpoint? Using your knowledge from ISQS 5341 to this point, describe fully and completely the processes activated by the swipe of that card. Who benefits from the data from the swipe? How? Is any party harmed? If so, how?* 
	
	When a customer uses a credit card, they are completing an active data capture by voluntarily giving their personal information to the seller in order to make a purchase. This kicks off a separate process of passive data capture where this information is aggregated into datasets for both the seller and the credit card company. It will likely be used by both parties to build the profile of the specific customer, and be tagged with additional "environmental" metadata such as the median income of the store's location. This process benefits the seller, who may use the purchase history to entice future business with coupons or make inventory decisions. Credit card companies can sell aggregations of this type of data, or use it to inform it's own financial instruments. The customer may benefit themself, from receiving more targeted ads or useful discounts. However, there is a question about whether the customer actually consented to any of this additional use that is then used to target them specifically. There are additional ethical questions that arise about the safeguarding of this data which can create issues like the Equifax data breach, where nearly half of all Americans had their personal information exposed by a company who never directly received this data from consumers.

5. *A company called Itinerantur provides travel experiences for upper middle-class individuals. The company specializes in trips to unusual destinations around the world with unique, personalized experiences at each destination. Customers are always surprised on their first trip organized by Itinerantur at the level of personalization they receive in their experiences and the accuracy of Itinerantur in predicting their preferences. Suggest ways that Itinerantur can use big data and analytics to create these unique, personalized experiences for their customers in 150 words or fewer.*

	Itinerantur can start by requesting survey information from its customers before the booking process begins. This would start the company with a rich dataset of information specific to an individual that is likely to be high-quality since the customer is incentivized to provide accurate information. With this foundation, the company can start cross referencing the customer with their own historical information about similar types of customers. They could also purchase data from companies like Yelp to filter locations, or consumer purchasing data to build customer profiles. They could incentivize customers to provide additional reviews after the vacation to help train models for future customers.

6. *Two analysts at a private jet company need to plan the routes for its 50 jets on a daily basis. The jets pick up and transport executives of companies for short distances and on average make about four flights a day. The executives are picked up and transported to and from many cities in a six-state area of the U.S. The analysts look at the requests for flights each day prior to the flights and use their judgment to route the planes. Is this a good way for the company to make these routing decisions? Is there a better way? Explain in 100 words or fewer.*

	Using human intuition to solve multistep operational tasks with this many variables would likely produce inefficient results. Instead, the company should use flight data and invest in data science teams that can develop algorithms to find more efficient routing decisions. A class article from HBR mentions how Uber was able to exploit a similar inefficiency in the taxi industry which relied entirely on human calculations of where to route vehicles. Uber's data network was able to solve this more efficently and align driver supply with demand.

7. *Ron is an analyst for a small financial services firm. He has been very successful in his job for 10 years. Ron's firm makes investment recommendations to clients based on various market data. Recently, the firm updated its systems to take advantage of advances in big data and analytics, but has not adopted any new interface tools for analysts. That has made Ron's job almost impossible for him to do well. Data arrive so quickly and so voluminously that he barely has time to react and do any analysis before the next data arrive. Describe the characteristics of big data that Ron is experiencing. Should the firm fire Ron and replace him with someone more competent? Are there other things the firm can do to make Ron more effective at his job? If so, what should be done? Answer in 200 words or fewer.*

	Ron is struggling to keep up with the massive scale and quick velocity of incoming data. Any analyst in Ron's position would struggle to create useful information without the proper tools to efficiently parse the data, so it is not an issue of his competency﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿. While big data provides a wealth of information, there are tools and processes required to transform that into economic value.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ ﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿The company should invest in those tools if it wants to realize value out of its data or employees.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿


8. *XYZ Corp. owns billboards that sit along the edges of highways throughout the United States. XYZ seeks to maximize its revenues by charging as much as possible to companies that want to advertise using its billboards. In recent years the company has been able to adjust its pricing for its billboards much more precisely. How might big data and business analytics play a role in XYZ's pricing of its billboards? Answer in 120 words or fewer.*

	Modern billboard companies are placing sensors near their locations to monitor traffic and any other information that can be gleaned from cars and smartphones passing by.  Even this single metric of advertising population helps inform pricing decisions for their customers, who are likely invested in understanding the amount of visibility their ad will receive. Depending on the data available from those phones, there might be additional useful information to advertisers such as the phone type. These details may seem insignificant, but they can be valuable if aggregated and are more helpful than have no information about the potential customer base. 
